README.md, before:

<a href="http://home.houseofhawkins.com:8080/viewType.html?buildTypeId=AutoValidator_Nuget&guest=1">
<img src="http://home.houseofhawkins.com:8080/app/rest/builds/buildType:(id:AutoValidator_Nuget)/statusIcon"/>
</a>

# AutoValidator

## GOAL

AutoValidator's aim is to create a simple, fluent and intiutive framework to validate data and models in your dotnet applications. Simply put; an application would validate some data and get a result object.  That object would state sucess or failure and detail the failing data.

There are two basic ways to validate data:

 * Simply call validate on each item of data as you need to.
 * Define a validation schema for a model, then call validate on an instance of that model.

One of the principles AutoValidator follows is that exceptions should only happen in exceptional situations, so it will not throw an exception when some data is incorrect, it will simply return a result object detailing what is wrong.

the validation schema process is heavily guided by [AutoMapper](https://github.com/AutoMapper/AutoMapper).


## Getting Started

If you just want to validate individual variables, simply create an instance of `Validator`.

 ```c#
 var validator = new Validator();
 ```

If you wish to use schema validation; first create an instance of `MapperConfiguration`, define the `MapperConfigurationExpression` then create a factory to create instance of validators.

```c#
var mapper = new MapperConfiguration();
Action<IMapperConfigurationExpression> configure = cfg =>
{
    cfg.AddProfile<ModelToBeValidatedProfile>();
};

mapper = new MapperConfiguration(configure);

var factory =  mapper.CreateFactory();

var validator = factory.Create<ModelToBeValidated>();
```

You only need to create one instance of the mapper, its configuration and the factory.  Then use the factory instance to create new instances of the validator as required.

For the basic Validator, validations occur as that line of code executes.  For Generic Validators the expressions are stored and only executed when `.Validate()` is called.

For further information about [configuration and setup](https://github.com/twistedtwig/AutoValidator/wiki/Mapper-Configuration-Setup)


## Basics of using validators

There are two types of validators.  Generic and non generic.

 - Generic validators use the schema validation process set out in [configuration and expression setup](https://github.com/twistedtwig/AutoValidator/wiki/Mapper-Configuration-Setup)
 - Non Generic validators are for validating individual variables.

 ### Generic Validator
 ```c#
var validator = factory.Create<ModelToBeValidated>();

var model = new ModelToBeValidated();

var result = validator.Validate(model);
 ```

 ### Non Generic Validator
 ```c#
 var validator = new Validator();
 var result = validator.IsEmailAddress(someVariable).Validate();
 ```
 
validations can be used in a fluent fashion.

### Fluent Validator
 ```c#
 var validator = new Validator();
 var result = validator
	.isMinValue(someInt, 18)
	.IsEmailAddress(someVariable)
	.Validate();
 ```

For a fuller explaination see, [Details on how to use the validators](https://github.com/twistedtwig/AutoValidator/wiki/Validator-usage)



 [Further Reading](https://github.com/twistedtwig/AutoValidator/wiki)


### TODO 
 - [ ] allow two custom expressions on same prop as can't tell if its same expression or not.
 - [ ] custom expression error message string format options
 - [ ] standard expression error message string format options
 - [ ] add option to pass in whole object of T to classValidator so that profile rules can use other properties to check validation
 - [ ] validating lists of simple types
 - [ ] add option to pass in a validationSpec object (TV) as well as the object to be validated.  this can mean that the user can define dynamic expressions in a profile (i.e. the params used can change dynamically during execution)
 - [ ] allow a dynamic object to be b used for validationSpec instead of TV, only apply that rule if a property has a value.
 - [ ] test error message override in classValidator, regular string validator and regular fluent validator
 - [ ] think of way to pass in values to mapping profiles, think it could be a validationParameters object (VT), would mean it can be used in any of the expressions.
 - [ ] add use mapping expression to the iClassValidator so that it will know to check for other mapping expressions to validate that object
 - [ ] validating single child property (add mappingexpression collection object, that will recursively get all child mappings)
 - [ ] validating child property lists
 - [ ] add more IValidatorExpression functions (have a look at https://github.com/gnpretorius/simple-validator)

Commit message:

some failing tests, want to get on with other work

README.md, after:

<a href="http://home.houseofhawkins.com:8080/viewType.html?buildTypeId=AutoValidator_Nuget&guest=1">
<img src="http://home.houseofhawkins.com:8080/app/rest/builds/buildType:(id:AutoValidator_Nuget)/statusIcon"/>
</a>

# AutoValidator

## GOAL

AutoValidator's aim is to create a simple, fluent and intiutive framework to validate data and models in your dotnet applications. Simply put; an application would validate some data and get a result object.  That object would state sucess or failure and detail the failing data.

There are two basic ways to validate data:

 * Simply call validate on each item of data as you need to.
 * Define a validation schema for a model, then call validate on an instance of that model.

One of the principles AutoValidator follows is that exceptions should only happen in exceptional situations, so it will not throw an exception when some data is incorrect, it will simply return a result object detailing what is wrong.

the validation schema process is heavily guided by [AutoMapper](https://github.com/AutoMapper/AutoMapper).


## Getting Started

If you just want to validate individual variables, simply create an instance of `Validator`.

 ```c#
 var validator = new Validator();
 ```

If you wish to use schema validation; first create an instance of `AutoValidation`, define the `ValidatorConfigurationExpression` then create a factory to create instance of validators.

```c#
Action<IValidatorConfigurationExpression> configure = cfg =>
{
    cfg.AddProfile<ModelToBeValidatedProfile>();
};

var validator = new AutoValidation(configure);

var factory =  mapper.CreateFactory();

var validator = factory.Create<ModelToBeValidated>();
```

You only need to create one instance of the AutoValidation, its configuration and the factory.  Then use the factory instance to create new instances of the validator as required.

For the basic Validator, validations occur as that line of code executes.  For Generic Validators the expressions are stored and only executed when `.Validate()` is called.

For further information about [configuration and setup](https://github.com/twistedtwig/AutoValidator/wiki/Validator-Configuration-Setup)


## Basics of using validators

There are two types of validators.  Generic and non generic.

 - Generic validators use the schema validation process set out in [configuration and expression setup](https://github.com/twistedtwig/AutoValidator/wiki/Mapper-Configuration-Setup)
 - Non Generic validators are for validating individual variables.

 ### Generic Validator
 ```c#
var validator = factory.Create<ModelToBeValidated>();

var model = new ModelToBeValidated();

var result = validator.Validate(model);
 ```

 ### Non Generic Validator
 ```c#
 var validator = new Validator();
 var result = validator.IsEmailAddress(someVariable).Validate();
 ```
 
validations can be used in a fluent fashion.

### Fluent Validator
 ```c#
 var validator = new Validator();
 var result = validator
	.isMinValue(someInt, 18)
	.IsEmailAddress(someVariable)
	.Validate();
 ```

For a fuller explaination see, [Details on how to use the validators](https://github.com/twistedtwig/AutoValidator/wiki/Validator-usage)



 [Further Reading](https://github.com/twistedtwig/AutoValidator/wiki)


### TODO 
 - [ ] object validation does not always deal with custom expressions for the format string.
 - [ ] validating lists of simple types
 - [ ] add option to pass in a validationSpec object (TV) as well as the object to be validated.  this can mean that the user can define dynamic expressions in a profile (i.e. the params used can change dynamically during execution)
 - [ ] allow a dynamic object to be b used for validationSpec instead of TV, only apply that rule if a property has a value.
 - [ ] test error message override in classValidator, regular string validator and regular fluent validator
 - [ ] think of way to pass in values to mapping profiles, think it could be a validationParameters object (VT), would mean it can be used in any of the expressions.
 - [ ] add use mapping expression to the iClassValidator so that it will know to check for other mapping expressions to validate that object
 - [ ] validating single child property (add mappingexpression collection object, that will recursively get all child mappings)
 - [ ] validating child property lists
 - [ ] regular validator could make prop name optional.  if not given could just return general errors, rename errors to prop errors
 - [ ] have a way of setting some values in the validator initial setup
 - [ ] add more IValidatorExpression functions (have a look at https://github.com/gnpretorius/simple-validator)
